FABYAN VILLA
In 1905 textile businessman Colonel George Fabyan and his wife Nelle purchased
10 acres with a c.1870 farmhouse on the Fox River in Geneva, Illinois. Originally from
Boston, he and his wife had been living in Chicago since 1892.
In 1907 they hired Frank Lloyd Wright to redesign and expand the simple farm
house. They then decided to live in Geneva year-round. The redesigned house has many
features of Prairie Style architecture that Frank Lloyd Wright made famous. To George
and Nelle, it was their country home, and they called it the Villa.
Over time, the Villa became part of a 300-acre estate the Fabyans named
Riverbank. Riverbank was developed by the George and Nelle so they could spend their
time on their own interests. Among George’s interests was scientific research and
technological development. He created a private laboratory, where experts, scientists and
other workers worked on a wide variety of ideas, including trying to prove the authorship of
Shakespeare's plays, helping the U.S. government with code breaking during World War I,
groundbreaking acoustic research, development and production of tuning forks, medical
research. He also collected unusual artifacts and had a small private museum at the
Laboratory.
Mrs. Fabyan grew roses and peonies, and tended the rose arbors and formal
gardens, including the Centennial Garden and Japanese Garden. Two banks of
greenhouses existed on the estate to support the massive gardening efforts. She also
loved animals, raised national award winning Jersey cattle and show dogs and trained
carrier pigeons. The estate also sported a zoo which included bears, deer, monkeys, a
wolf, prairie dogs, alligators and exotic birds.
Many other features of the estate indicate the Fabyans enjoyed the outdoors. On
the west lawn of the Villa, there was a cement firepit surrounded by hammocks and chairs.
Paths and benches lined the Villa grounds. Fountains and grottoes were created in
natural ravines and depressions. A large swimming pool sat at the south end of their
island in the river. A boathouse on the west bank housed a canoe, rowboat and sailboat.
Tennis courts and an outdoor amphitheater were installed for guests and parties.
One of the Fox Valley’s most famous landmarks is also a Fabyan relic. Fabyan
had a Dutch windmill moved to his property in 1914 from York Center (near Lombard,
Illinois). The windmill ground grain for the Fabyans and local farmers until about 1920
when it was no longer operated regularly. The windmill has been restored and turns when
there is enough wind.